Derby County will renew acquaintances with Benfica this summer after final details to take part in the Algarve Football Cup this summer were completed.

Nigel Pearson’s side will head to Portugal for a week-long training camp – between Wednesday 13 July and Wednesday 20 July – as part of their 2016/17 preparations and during their stay in the southern part of the country the club will compete in two games.

As part of the Rams' week-long training camp, they will face Benfica and fellow Primeira Liga outfit Vitoria Setubal in the Algarve Football Cup.

The first fixture will see Derby take on Vitoria Setubal on Friday 15 July, kick-off: 8:30pm.

The following day will see Pearson’s side take on Benfica, who reached the Quarter-Finals of the 2015/16 UEFA Champions League competition and lifted the Primeira Liga title, on Saturday 16 July, kick-off also 8:30pm.

Both of Derby’s fixtures will be played at the state-of-the-art Estádio Algarve – a purpose built-stadium for the 2004 European Championship Finals.

Boasting a capacity of around 30,000, the Estádio Algarve hosted three Euro 2004 fixtures and has since been occupied by the Portugal and Gibraltar national teams.

About Vitoria Setubal:

Managed by Quim Machado, Vitoria Setubal finished 15th in this season’s Primeira Liga – finishing just a point above the relegation zone.

In the history of the club, they have lifted the league title on one occasion as well as the Portuguese Cup three times.

Founded in 1910, Vitoria Setubal play their games at the Estádio do Bonfim, which has a capacity of 18,694.

About Benfica:

Champions of Portugal for a third consecutive year, Benfica are classed as one of the biggest club’s in the European game.

During the 2015/16 season, they reached the Quarter-Finals of the Champions League, where they were beaten by Bayern Munich over two-legs.

Benfica, however, have the second most participations in the European Cup/ UEFA Champions League – second only to Real Madrid.

Historically, Derby defeated the Águias (Eagles) over two legs in the 1972 European Cup – winning the first leg at the Baseball Ground 3-0 courtesy of goals from John McGovern, Kevin Hector and Roy McFarland.

JTA are offering an exclusive package for this summer's tour to Portugal. For more information, email JTA at: [email protected] to register for details which they will then contact once the details are confirmed.

Derby County 2016/17 pre-season so far…

Wednesday 13 July – Portugal training camp

Friday 15 July – Vitoria Setubal (Estádio Algarve) 8:30pm KO

Saturday 16 July – Benfica (Estádio Algarve) 8:30pm KO

Saturday 23 July – Walsall (Banks’s Stadium) 3pm KO

Tuesday 26 July – Chesterfield (Proact Stadium) 7:30pm KO

Wednesday 27 July – Sheffield United (Bramall Lane) 7:45pm KO

Tweets by @ dcfcofficial