ALLEN PARK -- There was some fear that Ndamukong Suh had opened himself to possible retaliation hits following his latest questionable football act. Seems he had to wait only one week for the first blow, after Arizona right guard Paul Fanaika dove at Suh's knees behind a play during Sunday's game. But there's been little media coverage of the hit, and no public backlash.

Ndamukong Suh was on the other side of a questionable block Sunday against Arizona, but isn't making a big deal about it.

And the Detroit Lions defensive tackle isn't angry at the possible double-standard. "(That kind of hit) happens all the time," Suh said during a news conference Wednesday "It's not going to stop. Look forward to it -- look forward to keep making plays down the field. That's my job. "To me, it's just gnats that are in the air that keep going after you. You swat at 'em, and sometimes you hit 'em, sometimes you don't. Sometimes they run away, sometimes they come back again. But ultimately, I'm just that bee going to find that honey hole. That's what I do." Suh was excoriated by various players, past and present, as well as coaches and some media for blocking Minnesota center John Sullivan in the knees in the opener. He drew a record $100,000 fine. Fanaika, conversely, wasn't whistled for a penalty -- in fact, the block was legal because Fanaika's an offensive lineman -- and the country hasn't rallied to Suh's defense. Suh said he "doesn't care" about being treated differently in the media. "That's not my job," he said. Coach Jim Schwartz shrugged off the play as well, and wouldn't disclose whether Detroit has or plans to file a grievance with the league. "That whole turning plays in and saying the league called and said this, I honestly think that's a little unbecoming," Schwartz said. "We try to keep our conversations with the league just to that. If they tell us they blew a call ... I mean, how many times have I come up here and said that? "Probably never, because we don't make excuses. We don't want to make excuses for stuff like that." Schwartz did seem to have some issue with the rule itself though, which allows for offensive lineman to block below the waist as long as it's from the front. "Is it less of an injury risk (than if a defensive lineman does it)? No, but it's a legal play as opposed to a play that's penalized, so it is what it is," he said. Suh also denied a Fox Sports report that he's stomped on teammates in practice, deferring to previous statements from Schwartz and center Dominic Raiola that it never happened.